# Status Report
**Project Updates:**
The final project has been going very well, but there have been some changes since the initial project plan. Instead of combining the data first, we decided to clean it before to make the process easier. Even with this change in our plan, we were able to complete a good portion of the tasks we hoped to complete. We did not receive specific feedback for Milestone 2. As a result, no direct changes were made based on external feedback. However, we made internal adjustments to our project plan based on our progress and challenges. 

As mentioned in our project plan, our first step was to acquire our two datasets for our project. One of our datasets is collected from the United States Census Bureau, and the other from the Chicago Data Portal. From the beginning, we encountered a few challenges that disrupted the preprocessing stage of our project. Our original plan was to use an API key to acquire our data. We believed this was the most effective way of ensuring good data quality by maintaining accuracy and timeliness. Although this method was successful for the Grocery Store dataset located in the Chicago Data Portal, we encountered great difficulty when it was time to import the Census data. We were constantly getting error messages regarding our limit. Attempts were made to get past this error message by testing different parameters and limits. However, we were unsuccessful. After discussion, the group ultimately decided to directly download a CSV dataset from the census website rather than using an API to directly request a dataset. Since the census hasn’t been updated since the data was last collected, we believe that it is reasonable to assume that the data will not be updated during the duration of our project. In order to do so, we went through a very rigorous filtering process. We refined the dataset to include only ZIP codes within Chicago, excluding all others. To achieve this, we manually identified and selected each ZIP code corresponding to the Chicago area. This process involved reviewing all ZIP codes in Illinois and narrowing them down to approximately sixty that fall within Chicago. 

Once we imported the data, our next step was to clean the dataset to prepare our data for record linkage. First, we cleaned the Grocery Store dataset. Looking at the “zip” column, we noticed that some zip codes had additional digits. While this provides valuable information on specific areas, we did not find this relevant to the goal of our project, as we were trying to generalize neighborhoods. Additionally, zip codes are most commonly referred to by the first five digits, and this was the format that our other dataset had as well. We were able to convert the zip codes into a string and index all of the zip codes so that only the first five numbers would be present in the columns. Next, we took a look at the addresses of the grocery stores. We noticed that some addresses were typed in all capital letters while others used standard English conventions. To keep things consistent, we changed all the strings in the column to all caps. Finally, we dropped columns such as “location” and “last_updated” because we felt like it didn’t fit with the goal of our project. 
-[Cleaned Grocery Df](./grocery_df_cleaned.csv/)

Next, we cleaned the Census Data. First, we got rid of every row outside of the median. The original dataset gave multiple income ranges; as mentioned in our project plan, we are only looking to compare the median of each Zipcode area. For these reasons, we got rid of every row outside of the median. The dataset included multiple status demographics: “Households”, “Families”, “Married-couple families”, “Nonfamily households”. We made the decision to only look at “Households”, as we believed it is less complex and time-consuming to compare just one status, and “Household” is a better generalization and representation of an area, as it includes all people who occupy a house, compared to others. Later, we got rid of our margin of error column. While accounting for the margin of error is valuable, we found that including it added unnecessary complexity to our comparison. After these changes were made, we believed the columns containing the zipcode were not tidy enough for us to compare the two datasets. For instance, the header for zipcode would say “ZCTA560601 !!Households!!Estimate”. Outside of the zipcode number, words like “ZCTA” were something trivial to our dataset and made it difficult for us to compare later on. We made it so our zipcode column only contains the five numbers. Because the zip codes are in the columns, we may encounter some challenges when we merge the data. We will review our record linkage labs and ask the TAs for help if we are encountering some difficulties. 
-[Cleaned Final Household df](./final_household_df_cleaned.csv/)

The cleaning progress for the two datasets is recorded in our “FinalP.ipynb”

**Timeline:**
Due to some drawbacks, we had to change the Project Plan’s timeline. Compared to our initial plan, we weren’t able to progress by the dates we initially proposed. Our updated timeline is as follows. By the end of this week, we hope to merge the two datasets. We are considering two methods for merging the datasets. One involves record linkage, which will identify matching entities by comparing corresponding columns or using the groupby function.Once we have merged the datasets, we will begin our data analysis. We hope to have this completed by 4/24. After the analysis, we plan on creating data visualizations up until 4/26. Finally, we will complete the final project submission by 5/3. To ensure we meet the deadline, we will split up the writing that needs to be completed on the day we meet up to create data visualizations. 

**Work Distribution:**
Eric focused on cleaning the Census dataset and compiled all preprocessing changes for both the Census and Grocery Store Datasets (including the work completed by Joyce) into a Google Colab notebook, providing a comprehensive reference for the [StatusReport.md]. Joyce was responsible for cleaning and analyzing the Grocery Store Dataset. Because Joyce was having issues with her GitHub, Eric committed all the work completed by Joyce. Joyce wrote about her data cleaning process and updated the timeline portion of the assignment. Additionally, Joyce checked the grammar, ensured the status report met the guidelines, and reviewed the submission. Joyce and Eric both worked on the project updates section. 


